[Applause]
This is open to debate. Welcome
everybody. I'm John Donban. I wear the
office of moderator in chief. We're in
New York City at a club called Racket
New York City. Normally a music venue,
but we have taken it over to hold a
debate in a place that happens to stand
just a mile or so from an historic site.
The tavern where in 1783 George
Washington said farewell to his troops
after leading them to victory in the
American Revolution. appropriately close
given why we are here today and what we
are debating. But before we get to that,
I want to remind you that around the
time of the war's end, there were calls
made for George Washington to be given a
crown and proclaimed king, king of the
new United States. It was a proposal
that came from some of the officers who
served under him. They were serious
about it. They were concerned that the
operation of the United States
preconstitution was uh revealing all
kinds of disorder and confusion. Um but
they didn't get very much traction with
the idea. U even though they felt a
strong hand was needed to take over.
Washington himself was a very very big
no on the whole concept. His words about
it were humanity revolts at the idea.
This revulsion, it's fair to say, toward
one man rule, one person rule, towards
extreme concentration of power, uh, also
guided the drafters of the constitution,
which still governs us today. James
Madison wrote in the federalist paper,
the accumulation of all powers in the
same hands may justly be pronounced the
very definition of tyranny. And so, we
have the system that we have. Nobody
says that it's perfect, but we've all
been taught from a very early age to
believe that it's pretty good. Um, and
far better than the alternative,
especially if that alternative is
dictatorship.
Well, one of our debaters takes issue
with that last premise. And his
increasing influence in Silicon Valley
and in some other policy circles has
been growing for some time. Uh, he was
the subject of a lengthy piece in a New
Yorker profile in June of 2025. In July,
Elon Musk reportedly consulted with him
on the formation of a new political
party. He's also been cited admiringly
by the current US vice president JD
Vance. His argument of record is that
the American system of governance, our
republic that we consider to be in many
aspects democratic or guided by
democratic values has failed and that
it's time for a form of dictatorship as
the best solution for what ails the
American body politic. You're about to
meet him and to hear his arguments.
You'll also meet his opponent who is
raring to tell you all that he thinks is
wrong with such thinking. But allow me
first to spell out the question which is
up for debate. It is this. Should the US
be ruled by a CEO dictator?
Let's meet our debaters. Arguing that
the answer to that question should be
yes, I want to welcome Curtis Yarvin.
Curtis Yarvin is a computer scientist
and political phil philosopher. Uh he's
had many blogs over the years, including
one under the pseudonym Menches Moldbug
and most recently his Substack Great
Mirror. Yarvin has experience as a CEO.
He founded a startup called Flawn that
developed a software called Urbbit. And
although he departed that company in
2019, he returned last year. He is here
with us now to debate and make his
argument. Curtis, welcome to Open to
Debate.
[Applause]
And here to argue the other side that
the US should not be ruled by a CEO
dictator. I want to welcome Eglenn while
Glenn is the founder of the plurality
institute and a board member of the
organization radical exchange
foundation. He's been widely recognized
for being a pioneer in the field of
digital democracy and he is currently
founder and research lead of Microsoft
research plural technology collabor
collaboratory which is aimed at making
sure that technologies are a force for
diversity and democracy in the world.
Glenn welcome to open to debate. Thank
you.
If the two of you could just for a
moment come center stage I just want to
do a little bit of stage craft and ask
you to shake hands to get us started.
Thank you. Double-handed.
Let's get to our opening statements in
our opening round. And this is where
each of our debaters has the floor
exclusively to himself for a few minutes
to explain their position. Curtis, you
are up first. You again are arguing that
the US should be ruled by a CEO
dictator. Here's your chance, please, to
tell us why. Thank you so much, guys,
for being here this beautiful New York
fall evening. So I have a uh a proposal
here which many people have um would
find instinctively
anathema, horrifying, strange, exotic,
weird. And to me, when I look at the
weirdness of this proposal as perceived
by the mind of the ordinary person at
this time in the 21st century, I think
it's sort of a sign of in a way how far
away from reality
the mass mind of the 21st century is.
And I'd like to explain that by simply
starting and this may sound a little bit
nerdy but if you replace government with
X and you say the question is should X
where X is not X the company but yes
also X the company. Well, where X is any
endeavor requiring
the cooperation of a large or even small
number of people?
And the question is, should this group
of people who are trying to get
something done be coordinated by a
single central group uh organization or
a central structure? The answer is
almost always yes. And so, for example,
you probably have an iPhone or a clone
iPhone. If you look at the box that that
iPhone came in, it says designed by
Apple in California, made in China.
Okay, by my account, that is two
monarchies, Apple and China, and two one
party states, China and California. Now
if we look at the difference between how
the organizations of China and
California both of which are sort of
governing structures operate
we see very clearly that the the
government of California the the
organization of Sacramento could never
have created the iPhone. Imagine CALR
the California Department of
Transportation being asked to create an
electric car. This idea is absurd. It is
preposterous. It is out of reality. And
so we see that basically all of the
things we use at all times are made by
these strange things called
corporations.
Corporations are monarchies. Sometimes
they're a diary in Silicon Valley.
Sometimes we'll do co-founders, but they
are all monarchies. Capitalism is the
system of little monarchies, little
kingdoms
that um you know solve all these
beautiful problems for us. If we look
for example again China, strangely
enough, China is also a monarchy under
the beneficent leadership of its ruler
Xinping. Not necessarily a huge Xinping
fan, but if you walk around New York
City and you walk around Shanghai,
you'll see some differences. For
example, in Shanghai, you were about as
likely to be attacked by a tiger as by
another human being. In New York, that
is not the case. And so what we see is
that actually across not only is this
you know the norm for or all effective
organizational structures. Go to see a
movie it has a director this is called
theory. What isour theory it's
monarchism. Go to a restaurant a
restaurant has a chef. Monarchism.
Again, you'll find structures that are
oligarchical in nature and collective
decisionmaking structures are very
unusual
in human history, even in the history of
government. Essentially, the that
monarchy is the norm is completely
accepted up until 250 years ago. And so
when we basically see oh you know uh
Hitler tyranny despotism and so forth
the thing we have to bear in mind is
that we are looking at monarchy in the
age of democracy and so the question is
what is going in uh on inside this
250year
bubble that is this bubble of like very
different ideas about government. When
we look at this period do we seem to see
governments that work really really
well? Have we like found the mystery of
that? Uh you know I really don't think
so. Actually uh you know when we look at
the technology available to government
today and we look at what a poor job
they do and then we look at a preodern
government which had 50th as many as
employees per capita, we see actually
no, we don't seem to have discovered
something new and more effective here.
So how did we even get here? Like what
are we doing here? because this is not
normal. Thank you. Curtis Arvin
[Applause]
Glenn, you are up next. You disagree.
You believe the US should not be ruled
by a CEO dictator. Your chance to tell
us why.
Thank you, John. Um I before we get
started, I just want to express my
gratitude to open to debate uh for
putting together this really important
exchange. Um yeah, round of applause.
And and I also have to admit to some
trepidation to encountering uh Mr.
Yarvin in person. I've long respected
him as being one of the most influential
figures of our time intellectually
uh and responsible as much as anyone for
some of the challenges that we're
facing. And you know, in the face of
that fear, um I have to say that the
easy approach uh to confronting someone
who has called for most Americans to be
put in solitary confinement and for our
billionaires to be expropriated would be
moral scorn. But I think confronting it
in that way would be a disservice to all
the people who found his arguments so
persuasive. And so instead, I want to
meet him on the ground that he stands
on. The grounds he just occupied of
historical experience because um as an
economist and political scientist, if
there's anything that I've learned from
study after study, it's how consistently
democracies outperform autocracies both
on average and in the stability of the
growth that they deliver. Um and it's
been found to be causal. Transitioning
to democracy increases income by 20% in
the long run. And if we look beyond um
you know the average to the extreme
cases, it becomes even clearer. Almost
all of the miracles of the last century
have occurred under relatively
democratic systems with all their flaws
against the backdrop of general tyranny.
Places like Japan and India, uh Estonia
and um Ireland, Batswana and Maitius.
And even the exceptions that Mr. Yarvin
loves to point to uh generally prove the
rule. Places like Chile, China um and
Singapore actually had their greatest
success during periods of relative
pluralism or as they transitioned
towards democracy. While almost all of
the greatest disasters of the last
hundred years happened under iron
dictatorships, places like Eratraa,
North Korea, Iran, Afghanistan and so
on. And if we look beyond the narrow
field of economics, it becomes even
clearer because even for their income
levels, democracies dramatically
outperform autocracies in extending
human life, progressing science,
preserving the peace, uh extending their
own stability, protecting the
environment, reducing social
inequalities, and on and on and on. The
past quarter millennium, the only broad
and consistent period of improvements in
living standards and reduction in
violence in human history, occurred as
democracy spread around the world. Now,
Mr. Yarvin will likely blame the
failures of dictatorship, on a poor
choice of CEO, or on too many checks on
their power. But I think if recent
experience and history teach us
anything, it's how hard it is to find
someone who absolute power does not
absolutely corrupt. Take Elon Musk for
example. For years, Mr. Yarvin and the
people around him have held him up as
the perfect CEO monarch. And yet, given
something like that opportunity earlier
this year, he was so mired in personal
distractions, amateurism, and
administrative chaos that his own agency
became something of a murderous clown
show. And um can we really blame that on
too many checks and balances? Um now
um Mr. Mr. Yarvin held up corporations
for you and you know I respect
corporations as well but let's be clear
unlike Mr. Yarvin I've actually worked
for the last decade for one of the most
successful in history and I can tell you
that success at that scale does not come
from an iron fist it comes from
multistakeholder feedback transparency
and um and decentralization of power so
um Mr. is definitely right about one
thing. Our democracies are in crisis.
Their people are divided against
themselves and have lost faith and
they're stuck in outmoded forms. That's
why I've devoted my career to radically
updating democracies for the digital
age. And that effort is bearing fruit.
In young and innovative democracies like
Estonia and Taiwan, we see the adoption
of digital technologies resulting in
social cohesion, resilience against
disasters like pandemics, and rapid
economic growth. and more mature
democracies like Japan, India and Brazil
are taking notice and showing us all how
a mature adult deals with challenges
which is with humility, determination
and a growth mindset. Those are far
better approaches for us to follow than
the childish fantasy that if we just act
out enough, Big Daddy will come and
rescue us from all of our problems.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
[Applause]
I just want to review what I think I've
heard our two debaters say. Curtis
Yarvin is arguing that uh US government
is is working very very poorly that it's
uh doing a poor job of delivering order
and prosperity that the uh mass mind as
he said has lost touch with reality and
that reality as he explains it is that
to get something done you do need a
central figure. He cites corporations uh
that we're all familiar with as examples
of where this uh uh principle is in
operation uh in ways that benefit
society in terms of the products that
they deliver that solve problems and
also add to prosperity. Uh Glenn While
agrees that our democracy is in crisis
but he also says that uh by most metrics
and by most examples uh historically
democracies outperform autocracies
economically and also socially. He says
there's been a correlation over the last
250 years between the spread of
democracies and human progress. And also
he points out that the choice of of some
individual to have the sort of absolute
power is not going to end well because
power always corrupts. So we're going to
have a discussion. Um as much as
possible I'd like to segment things into
small smaller chunks so we can take
things piece by piece. So I'm asking for
your permission to interrupt you. I also
want to tell you our rules are no
personal attacks, um no uh relentless
repetition of talking points, please
stay on point and please listen to what
each other is actually saying. And I
will enforce those rules dictatorally.
Um
good to have a strong leader.
Yes. And so the debate is conceded.
[Laughter]
Curtis, um I I want to come to you since
um Glenn was the last person to speak,
but you're making the a case for
uh corporations as a a model of how of
how it works. A lot of people would say
that living in a society is not living
in a corporation that it's just a
different animal. that a and that there
there your opponent also made the point
that within a corporation he's worked in
that uh decision-m has often not been
the result of a single strong leader but
if you can
first of all Glenn has worked at uh
Microsoft which is what we call a big co
it's not exactly a startup how much
revenue have your efforts returned to
Microsoft Glenn how much money have you
made for them
I think the way
bug
please
none of Leave
the out. Please leave. Leave.
Please leave. Please leave. Get out. Get
out.
Please. You You do not represent us.
Please leave. We're here to have a civil
debate.
We don't want you.
[Applause]
All right. Off.
Thank you, security.
Can you reset the uh clock a little bit
uh for that?
Yeah. Yeah. How much we lost? About two
and a half minutes, I think. Thank you
very much.
It's good. It's No, I think we learned
things. I think we learned things. Uh
because uh you know that's that's sort
of uh that's what's left of
progressivism in America today. And um
you know,
all right. All right. We we don't need
to go down that path right now. All
right.
How much did you make for Microsoft was
the question.
Yeah. So there's this interesting idea
that I learned about when I was a kid
called teamwork.
And the idea of teamwork is that um a
bunch of different people play different
roles and that makes it hard to
attribute things to individual
performance.
So your lab is essentially kind of a um
not exactly a cash cow for Microsoft
like you're not under like revenue
disappoint. What's your point though?
Uh my point is that basically Microsoft
at the scale that it's act actually acts
a lot more like a government. It's very
unlike the Silicon Valley startup scene
that is very competitive that I come
from. Actually, Google has become very
similar. It's a company with basically
one sort of giant cash cow that is very
reminiscent of like a tax flow and like
and so you're essentially running a
research lab that is really not part of
capitalism. So so I I could see us
spending a lot of time on on this side
of the conversation and where what I
really wanted to get to in my question
to Curtis was uh is is the the body
politic is political society like a
corporation or are there differences? In
other words, does the notion of a CEO
and you know shareholders etc. apply to
governance of a nation?
I mean I do not you know think that
there is a sharp or categorical
distinction between these things. I
think as things grow in size, as they
grow in power, they become more and more
like an organization that needs to be
disciplined by democracy,
multistakeholder feedback, etc. So, I I
actually have no particular objection to
running a debate with a strong leader,
to running an early stage startup with a
strong leader. All those things make
sense, and in fact, many democratic
theorists like John Dwey talk precisely
about the necessity of doing that. The
problem that they have is when something
gets very big, when it's very hard for
people to leave, where there when there
are very few alternatives, it becomes uh
very problematic to run it as a
dictatorship.
How do you feel about Franklin
Roosevelt?
I think I think there are good and bad
things about Franklin Roosevelt. I mean,
uh Franklin Roosevelt did some I think
things I think were generally positive
contribution. and I think he said did
some things that were really awful and
that the checks on his power that came
both from the Supreme Court and from the
Republican party were critical to
disciplining some of the worst though
not all of the worst. So like you know
the internment of the Japanese that he
did was was a horrible uh thing that was
not corrected by any of those
institutions and that's a stain on on
our country. Well, you know, I have a
lot of criticism uh criticisms of FDR,
but I think it's hard to deny that this
was a single individual running a very
very large organization. And I think
that when you look at, you know, there's
a saying essentially Microsoft is a
corporation in essentially peaceime mode
and it can become more oligarchical. you
sort of consistently confuse democracy
with oligarchy, which is something I'd
like to get into at a certain point, but
um you know certainly that company was
created by actually really two monarchs,
Gates and Balmer. And if you think of
Steve Balmer as having a colleial style,
like I don't know what to tell you, man.
Um you know these
I could I respond to that point? Um
please because uh as you may know I
joined Microsoft at the same time that
Sati Nadella became president. Um and he
was known specifically to become CEO. He
was known specifically for having
overcome a lot of the challenges that
the company faced um in the last decade
because of exactly those issues. He made
a center point of his time there. Um
decentralization and cultural change to
make sure that we included everyone and
since that time Microsoft's value has
increased I don't know if anyone's
tracking it. I haven't seen the latest
numbers. something like 20 times during
the time the previous period it was
declined slightly so you know certainly
I'm not saying that that means Balmer
wasn't a great leader he was in many
ways but uh there are many styles uh at
a company not all of which are
dictatorship that have had a lot of
economic success
sure but the thing is if you compare the
way Microsoft works to the way say the
department of state works or the
department of energy works you'll see
that the level of oligarchy even at a
defense contractor even in a nomally
nominally private company, the level of
process and bureaucracy. If you compare
Microsoft to a startup, Google today to
a startup, it's like 10x the process,
10x the bureaucracy. You look at the
federal government, you've got another
100x on top of that. Yeah. So, I don't
think there's anywhere that operates
without process. Having a dictator is a
process. Having having a uh you know,
Microsoft there's a process for
everything. In other places, the
question is are they effective processes
or are they failed processes? And I
think it takes a process to beat a
process.
Do you know that the concept of mission
orders is used for example in the
military?
It's the idea that basically you
shouldn't micromanage that you know this
is a German originally military concept.
The captain says to the lieutenant take
that hill. He doesn't say how to take
that hill. And I think that for people
who haven't had direct contact with
Washington, the level of distance in not
just Washington, but any modern western
government from that basic principle of
operation is so far away that you can't
even grasp it. This is why it is so
inconceivable that the government of
California could make an electric car. I
actually strongly agree with your point
about delegation of authority,
decentralization of power, giving people
the ability to, you know, make decisions
on things. That's why I'm a little bit
confused by your proposal to put
cryptographic locks on every gun of
everyone in the military controlled
directly by the co dictator. How does
that give people the ability to achieve
their mission without
Well, unless their mission is a military
coup. Uh, you know, like what? Like this
is used by nuclear use nuclear weapons
today. It's called a permiss permissive
action link. It was put in place so that
you know General Jack D. Ripper couldn't
launch a nuclear strike on the Soviet
Union by himself. And so, you know, I
don't think you disagree with the idea
that the president is commander-in-chief
of the military.
Curtis, um, again, drawing a distinction
between corporation and the uh,
political society.
Let me answer that in more detail in a
way because let me get back to your
original
Well, let me put it to you this way.
Yes. In a corporation, the people are
employees or their customers. In our
system, the people are voters. What do
people in this are what would people be
socially in terms of their political uh
uh power or or aspirations under CEO
dictator? The your your plan is that
there would be one election in which the
president who says I'm going to run for
office. I'm going to be a dictator. You
don't get to do anything else for
another four years. I'm in charge. There
won't be any more elections. There won't
be any government that doesn't answer to
me. There won't be any media that
doesn't answer to me. There won't be any
university that doesn't answer to me.
What are the people in your vision? Uh
the people in my vision actually have
about the same amount of power that they
have now, which is basically none. So if
you look for example at the um you know
I I think one of the most consequential
policies of our democracy is mass
immigration. This population has this
this this policy has never been popular
in any country. It is completely top
down driven and people feel that they
have no voice in it. And they're really
entirely right. They actually have no
voice in it. Uh if you look at basically
the way that public opinion works in in
our democracy, you see the sort of
remarkable pattern in which public
opinion is not a final cause as people
want it to be.
So what is their status? Are they
employees of the government?
They're subjects. They're subjects. This
has been basically the principles of the
law of nations have been well known for
thousands of years. Uh they were only
attempted to be revised uh you know in
the 18th century. They're subjects as
Charles the first said there's a clean
difference between a subject and a
sovereign. They're subjects. And the
thing about
let me let me I get your point that they
would be subjects. I just want to take
that to your for your response to that
change in status that we we would all
become subjects unless one of us gets to
be the same.
It's actually the real status. It's just
that we're pretending.
I I hear you on that. But but the
pretense would end.
I I just think it's important that we be
clear about what it means to be a
subject because in some you know context
you're subject of the king of England.
You know that you have all kinds of
rights, Magna Carta, etc. Mr. Yarvin has
repeatedly said that he believes
anyone's wealth should be able to be
expropriated if they are a concern to
the you know positions of the regime.
Fact check. Is that is that correct? No.
Okay.
So, so you wrote in I can I'm happy to
quote at length. I have uh your essay
from March where you tried to clarify uh
precisely your perspective about this
but you said that the billionaire's
money was just uh on a you know in a
computer somewhere and that root access
should be seized by the sovereign and
that it should be limited until it
wasn't any concern. So that's
essentially yes of course sovereignty is
absolute sovereignty is absolute today
you know essentially a court can issue
an order saying you the billionaire
don't have any money you know anymore
you are a subject of that court the idea
that the law rules in some sense is the
sort of 17th century British idea that
is sort of really completely contrary to
political science sovereignty is
conserved you know, if the US Supreme
Court says that you have to hang upside
down by your feet from, you know, this
lighting, you're gonna have to do it.
So, everyone actually
I don't think that's the case, but I
just want
everyone actually is
I want to I want to make clear just a
few other aspects because that's the
billionaires. On the other side, um he's
said that uh that
when this sovereign arrives that they
should round up anyone who's receiving
government assistance and put them into
solitary confinement with a virtual uh
you know simulation of social
interaction so that it can be determined
whether they uh deserve to have
just to get a fact check as you're the
source. I'm happy to read I'm happy to
read read the quote if you'd like. I I
have a whole set of quotes on on these
matters.
You may you may you may read your attack
quotes if you like. Um what I would say
is essentially um let me let me let me
contextualize that if you will. Um the
way I
I actually have quite a long context if
you want. I I I don't I don't I I don't
believe in quoting people out of
context. So I I've I've preserved the
whole thing and you should all feel free
to go and look at
we can we can hear it basically if
there's time. But essentially what I'm
saying, solitary confinement is a sort
of strange way to put this. Um
Well, you you're the one who used those
words.
What I'm saying No, I didn't mean
solitary. Um
you you literally used the word
solitary.
I meant that for actual prisoners. Um
No, what I meant is that basically
there's Go ahead. Do you want to Do you
want to
No, you did not use it for actual
prisoners. You you actually you used it
precisely. I'm I'm very happy to to read
this for you. So he says um a large
number of residents are effectively
dependents of the state. For example,
those who receive housing subsidies.
These people need to be repurposed re
reprocessed to determine whether they
can be members of a productive society.
Establish relocation centers with a high
degree of personal discipline. Modern
technology can realize the ideal of 19th
century penalological reformers.
Universal solitary confinement. In the
21st century, adequate social
interaction may be delivered
electronically. individualized cells.
Okay. Because there's a lot there. All
right.
So, yes. Uh so, so
may you make very clear that it's not
criminals. You said entire slums may
should be
so so the proper way to basically like
let's let's contextualize this for a
moment. So basically you go around the
world and you see a lot of people living
in you know extremely inhumane
conditions. You don't disagree with
that?
I I would agree with that. you would
agree with that, right? And so the
question of how a technological society
can basically take these people and
provide what is essentially a decent and
human way of living is really you know
open to question because our society has
really not solved that. Is that correct
for like 6 billion people? So when we
say okay you know how do human beings
live historically
just to be clear this was you're
advocating for the United States and
anyone receiving housing
this is so so so this is like I mean
there's so many different kinds of
people in the United States
although I you know you you do talk in
some of your writings about what should
be done with third world people you talk
about Gaza and the notion that all aid
should be cut off um so that's that's
that's another example of how
let's let's again let's Again, let's
let's address this question of what
you're going to do with people who are
um have essentially zero economic value
to the rest of humanity. You agree that
there's a lot of zero marginal product
human beings.
No.
In the world, you don't.
No, you don't. You don't agree with the
idea of zero marginal product.
I do not think that there are many zero
marginal product people out there. I
think there may be people put in social
circumstances that make it harder for
them to contribute productively to
society. But what should happen? Let's
say they're there. What what are you
saying should happen to them?
So,
so you've got um um
when you have people, what do people
need? They need social community. They
need basically to live in Dunar
numbersized groups
because this is our evolved evolutionary
environment. They need society. They
need purpose. They need meaning. They
need work. These are the things that
human beings essentially need. Do you
disagree with me on that?
I mean I I might prioritize above that
love uh connection to
all these things to the deity.
Absolutely. Absolutely. There are all
these things that people need. And the
thing is that basically when you have
the population of basically you know a
gigantic you know slum in say Angola and
you're an advocate of mass migration. I
believe uh and so the idea that this is
something that stays in Angola is not
something you believe in. You don't
believe that people's human rights as a
human being should depend on the GPS
coordinates where they were born, do
you?
Well, the first thing I would say is I
don't think this has anything to do with
whether you
can you answer the question. Do you
believe that your human rights as a
human being should depend on the GPS
coordinates where you were born? I think
probably yes because I think that people
are part of communities and people
that's not this is can you can you can
you circle this directly what I'm saying
is that this product this problem is
worldwide
the problem of what to do with the slums
of kinshasa is worldwide I don't see our
present oligarchy solving this problem
all right has to do with the role of the
United States
I I think I think you've reached an
impass on that point or you're doing
this. Let let me let me uh bring this to
you um from the same article uh that
your opponent is referring to. I found a
phrase that I found interesting and I it
leads to a question. You were talking
about what happens in that first week
after the uh monarch king is elected and
I'm quoting ideally within a week every
law enforcement officer in America is
wearing a red armband to show that he
follows the new president's direct
unconditional command. To me that
implies the expectation that there would
be resistance from the public to uh to
to this agenda.
We've seen we've seen the resistance.
Do you do you do you anticipate
Yeah. Good point. Do you do you
anticipate a smooth transition?
Do
I think that I think that Americans have
been depoliticized
to an astounding degree. I think if you
look at the political intensity of the
response to the first Trump
administration and the second Trump
administration where the second Trump
administration is doing by my book very
little but clearly like easily 10 times
as much as the first Trump
administration the response from people
like what we saw has been 10x less. And
you've also want to throw out the
current US legal system and
fundamentally functionally put all the
lawyers out there who have gone to law
school in the United States out of
relevance because they won't know the
system the new system could hurt.
Um president is above the law the
monarch is above the law just
right. Right.
No, I prefer basically the system of
Roman or civil law essentially a
Napoleonic code. Um you want to abolish
the media, shut down their servers. What
would happen to a debate program for for
uh the debate program is just fine. I
mean the thing is that what we have what
we have in the existing media is
something that looks like a private
institution but enjoys many many many
privileges of a government organization.
So for example if you pick up a copy of
the New York Times you'll see you know
people are always like you know should
Peter Teal compete with the New York
Times? You know, I was talking once to
uh SPF's girlfriend and he and she was
like uh you know, maybe he should buy
the New York Times and I'm like, if you
buy the New York Times, it's completely
useless because if you buy the New York
Times, either you're sponsoring the New
York Times the way Bezos is sponsoring
the Post, or you're actually trying to
mess with it and everyone will quit. And
actually, if you look at the way the
Times, which by the way is a fifth
generation hereditary monarchy, um um
uh if you look at the way that the New
York Times is connected, I
you shouldn't assume I feel any way in
particular about the New York Times. So,
so um I feel it's an amazing
organization, but if you look at if you
look at the let me finish for a sec. If
you look at the way the Times is
connected to the US government, you'll
notice something astounding, which is
that easily twothirds of the stories in
the New York Times on every day
basically contain information which is
only available to the New York Times.
They essentially contain information
that is stolen from the government that
is not released through ordinary
channels that is leaked and everyone
considers this an ordinary and regular
way of doing business. In fact, it's a
subsidy and it's a subsidy that prevents
anyone from competing with this agency.
And if you basically called it an agency
and you said, "Oh, this is actually part
of the government." You'd be like, "Oh,
yeah, the Department of Information.
It's the most powerful organization in
Washington."
And and so abolishing that does not mean
abolishing debates.
I I mean, look, I think there's a lot of
interesting things to discuss about the
New York Times and the way the media
works and how leaking in the government
works. I don't think it has anything to
do with whether one person should come
in and control everything and stifle as
much descent as they feel like or don't
feel like doing and put people in, you
know, concentration camps. I mean, it
just seems like those are very different
questions. I mean, media reform is like
an interesting question that we can
debate. It's not the topic we're
debating.
How would you go about media reform?
Because one of the things that you see
in a lot of these different questions,
I mean, I can answer your question if
you'd like.
Well, you know what? I I I I I see your
point. I see why you're making your
case. You're making your case that all
of these changes need to be made because
there are so many disperate power
centers that you feel I think are
fundamentally corrupt and you want to
bring in one guy to clean it up and have
absolute power for four years to do
that. Your opponent made the point that
anybody who gets absolute power is going
to be corrupted anyway by it. That
there's just something about human
nature, you can't avoid it. Can you take
that on? Uh yeah I that's a you know a
famous uh apherism of Lord Actton. I
don't believe in it at all. I don't see
it apply how it applies to Frederick the
Great, Elizabeth the first. Actually I
think that the truth is very much the
opposite which is that um it's actually
partial power that corrupts because the
thing is when you have an actual chief
executive who is aligned with the
organization he essentially has all of
that power. He doesn't need to say, "Oh,
I'm going to do something that's going
to harm the organization in order to get
more power." And so when you see
basically a functioning nation state in
the days before democracy, the king
essentially looked, yes, he looked at
Frederick the Great, absolutely he
wouldn't use the word CEO. He sees
himself as the owner of the nation in a
way. And when the king is the owner of
the nation, the assets of the king are
the land and the people of the country.
and improving and maintaining those
assets and making those assets flourish
uh is essentially his role. If you look
at the way basically the managers of
China have gone about it, they say, "How
are we going to increase the market cap
of China Inc.?" Well, we're going to
make our people much more educated and
much more productive and much more
industrious and all of these things. If
you look at the managers of United
States of America, they are not thinking
that. I just I want to I want to make
the point Curtis and I don't think that
you've been doing this deliberately but
you've had a little bit more speaking
time than your opponent and that's okay
but I want to give you a shot of a
couple minutes
respond to that because you know you
often make this argument that you know
the CEO owns everything so they kind of
want to maximize the value etc. their
interests are aligned.
But the but the thing that confuses me
about that is that I I understand the
notion that in a capitalist economy many
people are to a significant extent
motivated by maximizing the value of
their assets because they're a tiny part
of a giant system. And so kind of almost
anything they want they could get that
way. But once you're like really
powerful almost no one like really who's
really wealthy spends most of their time
trying to mostly maximize their wealth.
They do all kinds of other things. I
mean, for example, if you have
unconstrained power, imagine you have a
thing for kids. That's just your your
inclination, right? So, so how many kids
should you be allowed to make your
personal
How many cases of that in 2,000 years of
European history in um you know,
hundreds of kings have you seen?
I mean,
because all of your examples, all of
your examples of bad monarchs are all
drawn from inside this democratic
bubble. And I'd like to answer another
point that you made there, which is why
do autocracies, you know, not thrive in
democracy?
I just want to answer your you're asking
me a question and interrupting the
limited time that I've had. And I'm
interested in understanding like about
75% of emperors of Rome, for example,
died not of natural causes. So that's
interesting. It's interesting. And you
know, there's all kinds of colorful
tales about them. there, you know, there
there was this monarch I remember in
England who like beheaded some people
and then, you know, got married to some
and then actually made everyone at
gunpoint change their own religion in
order so he could do that. And it's like
President Obama didn't exactly do that
during his time.
No, but all our oligarchy is so powerful
that it makes people change the words
that they used. Do you use do you
capitalize the word black? When you
write the word black, do you capitalize
it?
African-American or black? I I generally
say black. I don't really think about
that. You capitalize it. Do you
capitalize it?
What does What does this have to do with
you?
Wait, wait, wait. Seriously. Seriously,
let me answer your question. Do you
remember being told by power to change
the way My point is, if a monarch had
told you rather than the New York Times
telling you to capitalize the B in black
and he had the ability to cut off my
head, I wouldn't do that. And that's why
I don't adopt all the trends in
linguistic stuff. And I and I'm happy to
do that or not do that.
There's someone who doesn't want to
execute me for for for my choices.
No, they wouldn't they wouldn't execute
you. They just
they just they just end your career and
they just end your career. And how many
times have you made a choice under the
pressure of this oligarchy to wait to
not say what you think? How many times
have you chosen oh I shouldn't say that?
Well, I'll give you a good example. I I
had a position on immigration that you
were referring to earlier which I've
actually changed my mind on some and I
went through a lot of heat and yeah that
wasn't like the most fun experience of
my life but I learned some things from
it. Didn't end my career. I didn't lose
my job. You know I've I've gone on to
all sorts of other things. I've met
different people. That's the great thing
about a pluralistic society. There's all
these different little elements and I'm
really glad there isn't like one person
in charge that if I cross them in some
minor way, you know, can say off with my
head as you're, you know, you relish
saying that that uh you know, strangely
enough, there isn't one person in
charge. And yet the level of freedom
that we have in this country is much
lower than the level of of freedom under
Frederick the Great, whose motto was,
"They say what they want, I do what I
want."
I mean look I I I I I I don't know about
making comparisons to periods that were
massively before we had any you know
digital technology etc. It's very
very complicated
industrial technology because it changes
what can be monitored by a monarch. It
totally changes what's observable.
Curtis the the the u the statement we
often hear nobody should be above the
law. the president should not be above
the law.
Your take on that?
So when you basically say when when
Charles I acknowledged that he was not
above the law, he was shortly to lose
his head. And if you essentially look at
pre uh AngloAmerican
juristprudence, you very clearly see
what's called the royal prerogative in
English history, which Carl Schmidt
called the exception. And the exception
essentially says that if the king is not
above the law, the law is above the
king. And the law does not rule. Law
cannot rule. People rule. And what you
said when you said, okay, the law is
above the king. You said you're actually
saying these judges are above the king.
And you're creating a situation that
classical political science called
imperium in imperio, namely the con
conflicting rule. You've created an
instability. And that instability is
going to lead to the victory of one side
or another.
That what you're calling instability. I
believe you're you used the phrase in
the beginning checks and balances.
I would call it even adaptability. Look
there there there there's a hypothesis.
It's very interesting that Mr. Yarvin
puts forward often that you know you
kind of carve things up you have
absolute dictators over everything and
then there's no violence. And we've
tried this. I mean there's historical
experience with this. in the 19th
century you know there was metick and he
did all this balance of power and etc
and just like it's very very clear that
we've had massive massive reduction in
death since that period I mean is it
like that's right that's and from
violence
deaths and violence in the 20th century
were the highest ever and I know you
blame that on your enemies you know but
like
even taking into account all all of
those things. There were there were
first of all there's massive technology
that enabled more extermination. But
putting put you you you attributed many
things to technology. But still even
putting that aside still massively fewer
violent deaths in the 20th century than
in the 20th century, World War I, World
War II, uh what you compare that to the
cabinet wars of the 18th century.
Compare that century to the 20th
century. You're telling me
certainly certainly after you know the
end of World War II.
the most democratic period in history.
Well, conquering the entire world will
do that. You know, conquering the entire
world basically gives you world.
I thought we had a rival during much of
the 20th century.
Uh well, we had the Soviet Union which
was in a way part of our empire and was
certainly part of our alliance that
conquered the world in 1945.
That's an interesting interpretation
that we were allied with the Soviet
Union. That's an interesting
interpretation.
That we were all lied to the Soviet
Union after 1945. No, I didn't say after
1945. I said in 1945. And so essentially
like our relationship with the Soviet
Union was not like a relationship with
Nazi Germany. Like you know
well this Soviet Union didn't actually
try to
we're we're we're again exploring we're
again exploring different threads and I
let me make them very No, I'm sorry. We
need to take a break because of times.
It's now time to take some questions
from the audience. And if you remember,
uh, I had mentioned
our protocols for asking questions.
Thanks for bringing up the lights. Um, I
see somebody in the very far back row.
I'm looking at you. If you could stand
up and we'd appreciate it if you would
tell us your name and come out to the
aisle so that the mic can be held in
front of you but not placed in your
hand.
Hi, my name is Connor. Um, I think that
we have an interesting kind of case
study today for uh, Mr. Mr. Yarvin's
ideas in Boule's El Salvador. And I'm
curious to hear what you would think
about how, you know, by transitioning
into what is functionally a monarchy,
their uh their quality of life seems to
have improved substantially as a direct
consequence of that and if that has any
bearing on your thoughts on the uh I
guess the broader topic of debate.
[Applause]
Is that for uh is that for him?
Yeah, it's it's a good question. Um,
Naive Buell has dramatically reduced
violence in El Salvador. Uh, and that's
been an incredible boon to the people
there. Uh, exactly how that happened and
in what way and for what reason is
something that our understanding of is
evolving a lot. There has been a lot of
evidence coming out that the uh you know
US intelligence services believe that he
made a deal with um uh many of the gangs
there and what that ended up implying
and what you know the people got. It's a
very complicated situation. I I think
that Boulli is not anywhere near the
kind of iron dictator that uh Mr. Arvin
is advocating and I think there are
certainly examples of uh countries that
at least temporarily have had
improvements in conditions through
having a dictator. It's very rare. There
are many many many many more examples of
ones that have had total disasters, but
there are certainly examples that have
gotten better. Chile is a great example.
They had a you know elected Marxist
government and they had a dictator
temporarily and it ended up leading they
transitioned back to democracy to better
conditions. Blly's had a lot of troubles
uh economically. Um so I I think it's a
mixed story. I don't I don't think one
has to like believe that every case has
ever been bad in order to think that on
average and you know in the distribution
democratic systems dramatically
outperformed
which is your argument on the whole.
Okay. Yeah.
I'd like to let you respond Curtis. I
think what's remarkable about Boullle is
basically how little resistance he's
experienced from the US government
because I think that you know when you
basically cherrypick your examples of
monarchies from the last 250 years
you're basically dealing with these
autocracies are all enemies of the
United States and Great Britain and so
actually living in a unipolar order
where you're essentially a rebel against
that order uh you know from Boule to you
know the kingdom the two Sicilles which
Gladstone called the negation of God. I
think what's remarkable about Boullle is
that he's basically thumbmed his nose at
the United States and that's worked and
that's allowed him to be an effective
dictator. Another great example of that
of course is Kagame and Rwanda who we've
allowed to govern the country out of
sheer guilt from permitting that
genocide. And again, I think the record
shows that when you remove this factor
of the US trying to destroy these evil
autocracies in its global democratic
jihad, they actually do quite well. And
I think that that's the factor that
explains the poor performance of
autocracies since Waterloo.
Another question. Well, I I just I just
want to can I respond to that point
because I I think there are many many
dictatorships that were actually
sponsored and in many cases put in power
by the United States that had equally
disastrous outcomes in Central America,
in South America. My wife actually
happens to be an expert on these things.
So, I I I think there's there are
definitely dictatorships that are maybe
even worse that the US supposed and
there because on the average I think US
takes the right side in conflicts on
average, but not not always, but but but
more often than not. Give me example.
I'm going to I'm going to move on
because of the sake of questions.
Contras,
if you could stand up and tell us your
name, please. Thanks.
Puja Oliver. Mr. Yarvin, is there any
part of the Bill of Rights who you think
is worth preserving?
Is there any part of the Bill of Rights
that I think is worth preserving? Uh, I
think the Bill of Rights is a very good
set of principles for for good
governance in a lot of different ways.
Um, I think that the essentially
unfortunately we're in a world where the
the judiciary and the legislative are
essentially at war against the executive
principle and unfortunately
the way that that's been interpreted is
kind of sort of all or nothing in an
increasing way. And so I don't know if
you mean for example the kind of the
14th amendment incorporation of the bill
of rights to the states. Would you
include that? Um I think that the you
know the whole situation of essentially
trusting the courts to be apolitical
actors is completely over. As Justice
Sotomayor said uh you know appeals
courts are where policy is set. Uh these
are the most undemocratic elements of
our society and that's the way our
government works.
Your answer is no.
Uh my answer is it's the whole system of
rule of law is an anacronism. So, so
it's not just the bill of rights but the
entirety of law that should be
Yes. I think that actually the idea of
law because uh our our our judiciary has
become so completely politicized they
have called the entire question of rule
of law into question. Final thought on
this point?
No, I I I mean look I I I think I'm glad
that he's clear about what he believes.
Okay. I I just want to say I want to say
one thing. That question was fantastic
in that it was like one sentence and it
got us to a really interesting place.
That's the model for how to do this. So,
thank you so much for doing it that way.
Right in the center there. Uh the mic's
going to come to you if you could stand
up.
My name is Don. Uh question to both of
you. Um
could you be a little louder, please?
A question to both of you. My name is
Don.
Do we live in a democracy or an
autotocracy?
We live absolutely in in an autocracy
because the uh it's not an autocracy in
the sense of a monarchy. It's an
oligarchy. It's one of the three
extillian forms of government. And
essentially until the Trump
administration, and this is mostly even
true of the Trump administration, the
effect of voters on the actual
operations of Washington is essentially
minimal and has been minimal for many,
many years. And so I would say yes, we
live in an oligarchy.
Look, I think we a lot of the ways we
talk about democracy do do a real
disservice to the idea. You know, we get
these things like this is a total
democracy. This is like imperfect
democracy. I think that maybe the US is
like a 0.01%
democracy and like other places are
0.00001%
democracy. I mean democracy is an ideal.
It is like a it's an aspiration. It's
like you know can we go you know fast?
Well, we can't go the speed of light. We
can't even go close to the speed of
light, but we can go a little bit faster
than we used to be able to go. And
that's how I think about democracy in in
it's sort of the same way the Soviets
thought about communism.
I can't I'm sorry that I can't see
everybody.
Um I'm helping a little bit right down
front cuz you're near the front. Yes.
And the mic's coming to you. If you
could go to the aisle to your uh to your
uh left.
That's a lot of climbing over people.
Sorry.
Is there a raised hand over there? Okay.
Hi, I'm Dylan. Uh, this is a question
for Mr. Yarvin. Uh, so I'm building off
of your earlier uh you earlier brought
up the company's uh Google and Microsoft
as these sort of degenerated, one might
say, uh, forms of bureaucratic
centralism. And uh I thought you know in
in opposition to bureaucratic centralism
we might say a Troskyist would believe
in permanent revolution. And how do you
approach the notion of absolute power
without falling into this degenerated
form of bureaucratic centralism? like
how is it possible for you to on the one
hand maintain this uh stasis in form
while at the same time retaining the
energy of a startup?
Yeah, excellent, excellent question. I
think that everything in human affairs
needs to be under tension and that's why
I'd be I think a little bit disturbed by
even the best design for a polity
becoming global. I think actually
history shows that the most sort of
generative times in human history have
been periods of small competing city
states. The Italian Renaissance, you
know, the Mediterranean before the Roman
Empire and and so I think that that's
sort of that is one force that basically
provides discipline and control. I'm
also basically not a believer in totally
absolute monarchies. I'm a believer in
what I call accountable monarchies,
which is again exactly what you get with
uh a modern corporation and its board of
directors and shareholders. Uh or even
what you get in the New York Times uh
and it's a class A shares controlled by
descendants of the Salsberger family or
even the Saudi monarchy and you know the
descendants of Eban Saud those have
proven to be very very effective
systems.
I guess my my biggest question about
that would be you describe the notion of
like some kind of election after some
period and then I guess my question is
how do you organize a free and fair
election if you've eliminated all
descent destroyed all civil society and
eliminated all media?
So, so uh you know good question. How do
you organize a free and fair election in
2020 when you can't even report on uh
you know Hunter Biden's laptop? I mean,
you know, the uh you know, we already
have this, you know, there's no world
with a fair and independent press.
What do you mean by such a thing? What
do you mean by free and fair election?
Uh, such a thing has never existed.
Well,
you you use that word in your you said
free and fair election.
Um, yes. And I believe that essentially
every form of democracy in the modern
world is a managed democracy. I believe
that autocracies like Putin's, they sell
elections in Russia. That's a managed
democracy. So you consider that a free
and fair election?
No, I believe it's a managed democracy,
but it's also a free and fair election.
People are voting uh you know and um you
know essentially
that's what you mean by a free election.
I understand there has never been an
unmanaged democracy.
That's really helpful.
There has never been an there has never
been an unmanaged democracy. If you read
basically for example Walter Litman's
public opinion like my god the things
they did in the 30s for an election. You
know, Americans voted for president not
knowing that FDR used a wheelchair. They
voted in 1940 for Wilki versus
Roosevelt. Well, he had been a Democrat
until 6 months before the election,
right? And so what is this free and fair
election? I I know of no such thing
actually.
But you use that word as as what the
market.
So So the thing is that is one of of
many imperfect ways of basically
creating an accountability system. think
all the media and all major civil
political civil society organizations
including political parties can be
eliminated and we can still have a free
and fair election.
Yes. Because today those structures are
all completely synoptic. They all speak
with entirely one voice. They are all
within one to get clarification.
They are all within one echo.
I'm going to go to another question. I
kind of wish the protesters had stayed
to ask a question rather
rather than the thing. Um I I can't see.
Are there any women raising hands? Cuz
yeah.
Uh yeah. Challenging question these
days. Sir, I I was okay. I was calling
on you, but somebody else
Yeah. Okay. Go ahead. If you could stand
up.
Um so your name, please. Uh my name is
Nidal. So as someone with a little bit
of computer background just like just
like you guys, my question is pretty
simple. It's about this notion of um
scale. So for you, do you think there is
you're pointing to Curtis?
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Uh do you think there
is a uh any um like number or scale
which dictatorship would work? Like can
we have a galactic dictator residing
over like one like 10 trillion people?
And for the other side, you think
there's a some notion of scale at which
dictatorship will work. For example, we
get the question mark and that's a good
question actually.
I don't think there's any level at which
hierarchical organizations fail to
scale. When we look at Apple, what's it
60,000 employees, 80,000 employees, uh
Microsoft similar, Google similar, uh
you know, Elon Musk and his various
corporations probably has 50, 100,000
employees. That's more than enough to
govern the world.
That's more than enough to govern the
world, right? Uh it's I mean we have a
lot more people in government today, but
that's because our governments are so
terrible and inefficient. If you look at
the ratios of govern of civil service
employees to you know people governed,
the best ratios were probably under the
Indian Raj the Indian civil service
governed hundreds of millions of people
with like 2,300
3,000 Englishmen something like that. So
yeah actually I believe these systems
don't you know have any trouble in
scaling.
So you got the opposite question. Is
there a scale is there a scale on the
opposite end I don't know commune
something like that where uh somebody
could have sole authority over the
decisions.
Yeah I mean look I I have no problem at
small scales with uh organizations that
have strong and narrow leadership
because there's a lot of opportunity to
leave. Now, if you have absolute control
over those people, that becomes slavery.
And I don't believe in that. I don't
believe in having one person be able to
like cut off the heads of anyone, you
know, in some organization, then they're
in. But if they have a limited scope
where they're allowed to like manage the
production of something or whatever,
absolutely.
Who enforces those limits?
Law.
Law. And who who law and And how does
that work? It it means that people have
a general understanding of a set of
moral principles that I mean this is
what Oliver Wendel Holmes wrote about
the common law. The common law which is
the opposite of the civil law and I
think is one of the things that's made
the US such a successful polity as well
as the UK is based on the principle of
what a jury would say more or less. It's
like what is the common understanding of
something and yeah the judges play a
role but juries are I think ultimately
more important.
Have you have you ever been on a jury?
Yes,
I have. I have twice. Uh actually it was
a crazy experience. Have you ever been
involved in a lawsuit, a legal
proceeding, anything like that?
Uh once. Yeah.
Was your experience that you had a very
efficient and effective legal system?
I don't think the question is one of
I think it's a reasonable I think it's
quite a reasonable question. Like does
the system work well?
I I think it works a heck of a lot
better than most other systems that have
ever been used on that scale to address
problems like that.
The Napoleonic code, the Inquisitorial
system. How do you feel about the
compromise?
I mean, there's massive evidence that
common law systems outperform in pretty
much every metric of of, you know, like
economic outcomes on average, civil law
systems, you know, there's a huge
literature in economics about that.
Curtis and your opponent mentioned
slavery and this reminds me that one of
the things that is said about your
viewpoint is that you and I just want to
get this corrected for the record if it
needs correction that you you favorably
cite Aristotle that the relationship
between u master and slave is a natural
human relationship. So uh if do you know
the etmology of the word family? It
comes from the Latin formulus meaning
slave. Actually, we use the word
emancipation, which comes from Roman
law, for separating a minor from its
parent, because actually the
relationship between parent and minor is
literally the same thing. If your
15year-old runs away, the fugitive child
patrol will basically track him down and
return him to you. Uh, and so, you know,
we have this arbitrary division at 18
years of age where we say, "Oh, this
kind of relationship is no." Do you do
you feel you're sufficiently reading the
room when you when you when you make
this case? I have no interest in reading
the room.
Okay.
Mr. Jarvin speaks for himself. I I
right here I think this is going to be
our last question.
Charles here is the current pattern of
self-sorting and redistricting really
moderate and dissenting voices out which
represents 43% of America
and democracy at work or the embracing
of autocracy.
I did you want me to comment on the
redistricting? I'm happy to comment on
redistricting. I mean, look, I I think
there are an infinite number of flaws
that I could go on forever about the way
that our current democracy is working.
Redistricting is one narrow aspect. I
mean, there are so many infinitely
better systems of voting that we could
use. Certainly, things that like
approval voting or rank choice voting
are a tiny step in a better direction to
address some of the issues that you're
talking about. Addressing the
redistricting would be even tinier step
that I don't think really makes a very
big difference, frankly. So it's I don't
think like in the grand scheme of things
it's like a major question. There's just
so many greater improvements that we
could make and know how to make and
other countries have made. So um
anyways, I mean it I don't I don't think
it's a great development uh that you're
describing, but I it it it's not on the
top of my list of things I would worry.
Curtis, uh I would say people vote on
the basis of lawn signs anyway. There's
only one election where people actually
know anything about the candidates or
care about them. that's the presidential
election. Um, you know, the way
districts are drawn is simply a matter
of advantage. We don't really have a
system of like consensus collegial
democracy in this country. We have a
cold civil war and
there's a woman over there.
You wanted a woman.
All right,
that looks like one.
All right, we're going to extend the
I hope this is a great question.
Genuinely and conceptually, how can how
can to totalitarianism
be
effective when when that's not what
humans are.
It's not unified.
I don't have anything to say to that.
It's it's I it's not not my position. So
I would offer it to Mr. Yarvin.
Okay.
So I would say that there is definitely
a restless human striving for power.
People want to matter. They want to be
powerful. They want to be relevant. Um
and we generally explain you know
democracy as saying oh this desire for
power leads to good government. Uh I
don't believe any of that. Um, I would
say that the sort of human for striving
for power is almost a sort of it's a
relic of kind of a kind of stone age
process. And what we see is that
striving is fed by a lot of essentially
pornographic things that convince people
that they matter in relationship to
Washington whereas in fact they actually
don't.
Do you want to comment? I mean, I would
say that the time when striving for
power that I've seen has led to the most
uh destruction and chaos has been the
hundreds of years of monarchy in which
there were constant civil wars and
fights over transitions of power as
opposed to the extended period extended
periods of I mean
every study that you have shows that the
the average gap between civil violence
over control of power under democracies
is like an order of magnitude greater.
Yes, because your democracies are the
Anglo-American Empire.
Okay, one more.
No, no, San Marino has been a stable
democracy for more than 12,500. It was
the earliest democracy. The Helvetican
Confederation that became Switzerland uh
is I mean it's not true that it was just
under Anglo-American Empire. Almost
every uh case of ex extended regimes has
been under some kind of democratic.
Okay, one more question.
Standing with the mic already. Can you
tell us your name, please?
Hi, my name is Mia Winther Tamaki. This
is a question for you, Glenn. Uh, what
do you think of network states as an
experiment for the tech CEOs as
dictators?
What did you say? Network states.
Network states. I
yeah Balaji Serrina Vasan's idea that uh
basically groups of people should form
online you break off and like try an
experiment in different ways of living.
Um look I love the idea of experiments
and new ways of living. I I really
dislike the notion that you're going to
get a bunch of people who are going to
just completely agree on everything go
off to somewhere and disconnect
themselves from the rest of the world.
So like you know the idea of a network I
actually the network state ideas is the
name is really contradictory because the
whole concept of a network was that
people are connected in complex ways.
They don't just like go off into some
feudal thing and separate themselves
from the rest of the world. They're a
part of a network. That is the meaning
of a network. The whole idea of the
internet was that we don't just have
these like feudal things. We have all
these complex connections. And so like
yeah I believe in network societies that
that have experiments going on or
connect everything else. I don't believe
in people like going off and like
separating themselves from everyone else
and running themselves like some kind of
a feat.
Okay, everybody, thank you for your
questions. We're going to move to our
closing round. Um, and our closing We
can do one of those. Yeah.
Um, and our in our closing round, each
of our debaters once again stands up and
makes an argument uninterrupted by
appealing directly to you. And Curtis,
you're up first with your closing. And
again, reminding everybody our question
is, should the US be ruled by CEO
dictator? You're closing, please.
Thank you. Thank Thank you everyone. Um
I'm trying to sort of go through the um
points here that I think have been sort
of poorly that we've poorly descended
into. I think the most important point
is essentially
I think that when Glenn sort of uh kind
of comes back to his studies and his
like results over the last 200 years and
so forth, I would say he's not thinking
very scientifically because he's
essentially looking at history through
this massive fisheye lens where he sort
of wants to essentially destroy all
evidence before 1750 or so. And he says,
"Oh, because they didn't have the
internet and antibiotics and computers,
we can sort of forget about anything
they learned in this period of time."
And I'm like, "No, actually, because
they had to run a government without the
internet or computers or phones,
actually, we can see how impressive
their results were." And there's an
example of this that I like to sort of
give in terms of the fall of the Roman
Republic because I think that there's we
sort of heard this con consensus idea
out there that the fall of the Roman
Republic was because you know
authoritarians took over. You know
actually the fall of the Roman Republic
was because the military system of the
Roman Republic was much much more
effective than the civilian system. And
the way Rome really found that out was
that not even Caesar had appointed this
guy called Pompy to basically extrapate
the pirates from the Mediterranean,
which was like ending the um drug gangs
in Mexico. And they were like, "We have
failed to do this with the the Roman
civil system. Let's do it in the
military way, top- down command, without
any computers or guns or cell phones or
whatever." As soon as they adopted the
monarchical way of doing things, Pompy
clears the Mediterranean of pirates in
three months. It's very very similar to
Boule in El Salvador. Here's a thing
that basically said people said couldn't
be done and it was just done. And people
are like, "Wait a second, we need a new
system of government." And that's what
created the Roman Empire. And I think
that if that hadn't happened, Rome would
have been destroyed by the Gauls
probably in about 50 BC.
Thank you, Curtis. And um Glenn,
the last word is yours.
Two score and 17 minutes ago, we came
forth upon this stage to debate whether
government of the people, by the people,
and for the people deserves to perish
from this earth.
The fact that we have to do that now is
as clear of a mark as any of the crisis
facing our republic. Because
because however extreme or even
nihilistic you may find Mr. Yarvin's
views, mark my words, he is not no more
a fringe figure in today's America than
I am. He is the ear of the vice
president and of the world's wealthiest
man. Thomas Jefferson charged every
future generation of Americans with a
sacred duty to remake our institutions
for changing times. And if we forget
what we love about our way of life and
default on that sacred trust, then we
richly deserve the future that Mr.
Yarvin promises us. Because as um Arnold
Twinby famously said, societies, great
civilizations like the United States
never die from murder. They always die
from suicide. And Mr. Yarvin today
offered us a rich offering of the kind
of cynicism and despair and distrust
that rens plurabus um from its unum and
that uh surrendered the vichi the French
to the vichi and Afghanistan to the
Taliban. Um but the American spirit has
never surrendered to any of the enemies
that Mr. Yarvin would have had us
surrender to. um the Tories, the slave
drivers, the appeasers, and the
totalitarians all wilted in the face of
the people who like my ancestors came
here escaping the lash and the gas
chamber. And it's in their name that I'm
up here on this stage today unwilling to
be part of the first generation of
Americans to surrender that legacy.
Instead, tired as I am, I'm here to
rebuild our republic so that my two
daughters sitting at home watching this
debate on the very ground where their
mother's ancestors fought and died to
see off our last monarch can grow up
with the courage and the pride in their
heritage to spit in the eye of anyone
who demands that they kneel before their
master. Thank you.
[Applause]
And um everybody that's that that is uh
a wrap on this debate. I want to thank
our debaters Curtis Yarpin and Glenn
Wild. We so appreciate that the two of
you came to the stage together, had this
out with one another, did so uh
respectfully uh throughout. So thank you
for for taking part in the debate.
[Music]